Collection elements (#6525)
dart-lang/site-www: src/content/language/collections.md

Author: Just laying the groundwork for our newest element. That PR will come next!

To learn more about configuring the types collections contain,
check out [Generics][].

[generics]: /language/generics
[collections]: /libraries/dart-core#collections

## Lists

Perhaps the most common collection in nearly every programming language
is the *array*, or ordered group of objects. In Dart, arrays are
[`List`][] objects, so most people just call them *lists*.

Dart list literals are denoted by a comma-separated list of
elements enclosed in square brackets (`[]`). Each element

> contains an expression or value. Here's a simple Dart list:

Author: Done!

var list = ['Car', 'Boat', 'Plane'];
```

Lists use zero-based indexing, where 0 is the index of the first element

> and `list.length - 1` is the index of the last element. 

Reviewer: I know it's what developers might be used to seeing, but I'm not sure that familiarity is worth the confusion from one term being used to mean both syntactical elements in a collection literal and actual values in a list.

When reading the page with "element" being used for both, it is quite confusing for me and I'm familiar with the distinction.

See https://github.com/dart-lang/site-www/issues/2631#issue-698613262 for some other background.

Maybe we could have a call about it?

For more information about sets, refer to the Sets section of the
[`dart:core` documentation](/libraries/dart-core#sets).

[`Set`]: {{site.dart-api}}/dart-core/Set-class.html

## Maps

> In general, a map is an object that contains elements in the

Author: Done!

> In general, a map is an object that contains elements in the

Author: Updated~

For more information about maps, refer to the Maps section of the
[`dart:core` documentation](/libraries/dart-core#maps).

[Using constructors]: /language/classes#using-constructors
[`Map`]: {{site.dart-api}}/dart-core/Map-class.html
[type inference]: /language/type-system#type-inference

## Supplementals

> The following supplemental materials can be used with

Reviewer 2: The language spec calls these "elements". So a list literal contains a series of elements, each of which might be an expression (i.e. `1`), a spread element (`...foo`)`, an if element, or a for element.

We don't *have* to follow the spec terminology. We don't always do a great job of coming up with names for stuff when we specify them. But we try and in this case, I think the name works OK.

It's up to you, though. :)

Author: I was wondering why we didn't use the term 'element' in this guide. I've updated this for `List` and `Set`, but I've kept key-value pair for `Map`. I think we should follow the spec on this. Element is a very common term. To me, it seems like an anti-pattern if we don't use it. Take a close look at my changes.

Dart's collection types.

<a id="control-flow-operators"></a>
<a id="spread-operators"></a>

### Spread operations

With a spread operation, you can
add values from one collection to another collection. Null
values inside of a  collection can be passed in, but null

> collections produce an error. A spread operation has this

Reviewer 2: I don't know if it's worth pointing out that the thing you spread can't be `null`. There are many places in the language where `null` is an error (like `1 + null` or `null.someMethod`) and we don't usually bother to call that out.

If your intent is to contrast it with null-aware spread, that makes sense.

Author: Yes, my intent is to contrast with null-aware spread. I'll add a link to it to make this more clear. If more is needed, let me know.

signature in a collection:

```dart
...<collection_name>
```

In the following example, the values in `a` are added
as values in `items`.

<?code-excerpt "misc/lib/language_tour/misc/spread_operator_in_collection_a.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart
var a = [1, 2, null, 4];
var items = [0, ...a, 5]; // [0, 1, 2, null, 4, 5]
```

In the following example, an error is produced because
`a` is null and can't be passed into `items`.

```dart
var a = null;
var items = [0, ...a, 4]; // Error

> ```

Reviewer 2: If it were me, I would omit the discussion of null here and then talk about null handling under null-aware spread below.

Maybe something like:

---

### Null-aware spread operations

Sometimes you want to include the elements of one collection in another,
but the former is also nullable:

```dart
List<String> buildCommandLine(
  String executable,
  List<String> options, [
  List<String>? extraOptions,
]) {
  return [
    executable,
    ...options,
    ...extraOptions, // <-- Error!   
  ];
}
```

Because of null safety, Dart won't let you perform an operation on a value that might be null, so this has a compile error.

If you want to spread a nullable collection, you can use a null-aware spread:

```dart
List<String> buildCommandLine(
  String executable,
  List<String> options, [
  List<String>? extraOptions,
]) {
  return [
    executable,
    ...options,
    ...?extraOptions, // <-- OK now.
  ];
}
```

When using `...?`, if the collection is `null`, then no elements are added. Note that if the collection itself is not `null`, but it contains elements that are, those `null` elements will be added to the result.

Author: Added! I included some sample data for grounding. I also included an excerpt for one of them that can also quickly be copied and pasted into DartPad to produce results.

I wanted to leave the super simple example as a baseline, so that's still there for now. If you really want to be rid of it, let me know.

To learn more about the operator used in spread operations
for collections, see [Spread operator][].

[Spread operator]: /language/operators/#spread-operators

### Null-aware spread operations

With a null-aware spread operation, you can add values from
one collection to another collection. Null values inside of
a collection can be passed in, but null collections are
ignored. A null-aware spread operation has this
signature in a collection:

```dart
...?<collection_name>
```

In the following example, `a` is ignored because it's
null, but `b` is passed into `items`.

```dart
var a = null;
var b = [1, 2, null];
var items = [0, ...?a, ...?b, 4]; // [0, 1, 2, null, 4]
```

To learn more about the operator used in null-aware spread
operations for collections, see [Spread operator][].

[Spread operator]: /language/operators/#spread-operators

<a id="collection-operators"></a>

> ### If statements

Reviewer 2: It depends on how precise/pedantic you want to be, but these technically aren't if statements, they're if elements. The distinction matters somewhat in that the thing inside an if statement's then and else branch is always a statement, and can be any statement:

```dart
if (condition) return x; // Return is a statement.
```

But the thing inside an if element must always be an element:

```dart
var list = [
  if (condition) return x; // Error! Can't have a return here.
];
```

Author: This is fascinating. I think we should definitely call them if elements. I'm guessing we call these if key-value pairs for maps? I'll change descriptions and titles so that we can test and see what we think.

Author: And after a little research, it seems that a map has elements and an element in a map has a key-value pair in it. I think I'm in alignment now.

You can use an `if` statement inside of a collection to
conditionally include values in the collection based on a
boolean expression. An `if` statement has this signature in
a collection:

```dart
// boolean expression must be true to include result

> if (<bool_expression>) <result>

Reviewer 2: I think this might be clearer if the example was wrapped in a collection literal:

```dart
var list = [
  if (<bool_expression>) <result>
];
```

Author: I decided to leave this one out because it calls out one collection type (I'm trying to avoid that with the generic syntax). If you feel strongly, I could create tabs that show each collection type and what this syntax looks like. 
@munificent or @parlough let me know your thoughts.

Author: Tentatively leaving as is & closing. If anyone has inspiration for change, re-open and add your thoughts.

```

```dart
// boolean expression must be false to include result

> if (!<bool_expression>) <result>

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's worth showing `!` here because there's really nothing particular to if elements.

But I do think it's worth showing an example of an if element with an else clause:

```dart
var menu = [
  if (isTuesday)
    'tacos'
  else
    'spaghetti',
];
```

Author: I've added a few examples. They aren't as fun as this one, though.

```

In the following example, `1` is included in `items`
because `includeItem` evaluates as true, but `2` is not
included because `!includeItem` evaluates as false.

```dart
var includeItem = true;

> var items = [0, if (includeItem) 1, if (!includeItem) 2, 3]; // [0, 1, 3]

Reviewer 2: Yeah, in this case, else would certainly be simpler:

```dart
var items = [0, if (includeItem) 1 else 2, 3]; // [0, 1, 3]
```

(Tangent: I was doing a readability review a while back and the author had code exactly like you have here. I pointed out that they could use an `else` instead. They replied "I don't think the language lets you do that." I said, "I'm pretty sure it does... because I designed that language feature." :D)

Author: I just realized something else. It's very good that you pointed this out because even Gemini didn't mention that the `if` element could include an `else` statement. I'll get these docs updated so that AI model answers are more accurate.

```

To learn more about the `if` statement, see
[`if` statement][].

[`if` statement]: /language/branches#if

### If case statements

You can use an `if-case` statement inside of a collection to
conditionally include values in the collection if the
matching expressions evaluate as true. An `if-case`
statement has this signature in a collection:

```dart

> if (<expression> case expression_literal) <result>

Reviewer 2: The thing after `case` here is a [pattern](https://dart.dev/language/patterns), not an expression. (It's a little confusing because there are patterns that are simply constant expressions, so you can use an expression here. But you can also use things that aren't expressions. And some things that syntactically look like expressions aren't because pattern syntax overlaps expression syntax.)

Author: This is pattern? Nice! I had no idea. I'll update and add a note about that.

```

In the following example, `1` is included because
`a == 'one'` evaluates as true but `2` is not
included because `b == 'two'` evaluates as false.

<?code-excerpt "misc/lib/language_tour/misc/if_case_operator_in_collection_a.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart
var a = 'one';
var b = '';
var items = [
  0,
  if (a case 'one') 1,
  if (b case 'two') 2,
  3,
  4,
]; // [0, 1, 3, 4]

> ```

Reviewer 2: It might be worth showing an example that you couldn't do just using `if (a == 'one')`. Perhaps:

```dart
var string = 'hello';
var coordinates = [
  1,
  if (string case String(length: var length)) length,
  3,
]; // 1, 5, 3
```

That's a pretty weird, contrived example, though. It's hard to come up with a good but simple example. :-/

Author: Added!

To learn more about the `if-case` statement, see
[`if-case` statement][].

[`if-case` statement]: /language/branches#if-case

### For loops

You can use a `for` loop inside of a collection to
programmatically generate multiple values and insert them
into the collection in a concise and readable way.
A `for` loop has this signature in a collection:

```dart
for (<expression> in <collection>) <result>

> ```

Reviewer 2: There are two kinds of for loops in Dart and we support both of them as elements:

```dart
var fruits = ['apple', 'banana', 'cherry'];
var list = [
  // for-in loop:
  for (var fruit in fruits) fruit.length,
  // Old C-style for loop:
  for (var x = 1; x < 4; x++) x,
]; // [5, 6, 5, 1, 2, 3].
```

Author: Excellent! Adding these signatures and examples.

In the following example, the square for each value in
`numbers` is included in `items`.

<?code-excerpt "misc/lib/language_tour/misc/for_loop_in_collection_a.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart
var numbers = [2, 3, 4];
var items = [1, for (var n in numbers) n * n, 7]; // [1, 4, 9, 16, 7]
```

> You can include `if` statements in `for` loops.

Reviewer 2: You can nest all kinds of elements arbitrarily deeply:

```dart
var ys = [4, 5, 6];
var list = [
  if (condition) ...[
    for (var x = 0; x < 3; x++)
      for (var y in ys)
        if (x < y)
          x + y
  ]
];
```

(In this way, Dart's control flow elements are much more powerful than [list comprehensions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_comprehension) are in other languages.)

In particular, it's common and idiomatic to use a spread on a collection literal immediately inside an `if` or `for`. In a statement context, if you want to execute a bunch of statements based on a single if condition, you use a block:

```dart
if (condition) doOneThing();

if (condition) {
  doMultiple();
  things();
}
```

You can't use blocks inside collection literals (because blocks are statements, not elements). The analogous construct is spreading a literal:

```dart
var list = [
  if (condition) oneThing(),

  if (condition) ...[
    multiple(),
    things(),
  ],
];
```

There's no special support in the language for "spread blocks" like this. It just naturally falls out from the fact that elements can contain other elements.

This pattern is common enough that it might be worth documenting here.

Author: I've created a new section called `Nesting elements` to capture all of this.

For more information about maps, refer to the Maps section of the
[`dart:core` documentation](/libraries/dart-core#maps).

[Using constructors]: /language/classes#using-constructors
[`Map`]: {{site.dart-api}}/dart-core/Map-class.html
[type inference]: /language/type-system#type-inference

> ## Collection elements {: #collection-elements }

Author: Saving these for now, but I'll make a note to check on these before I submit this PR.

> ## Collection elements {: #collection-elements }

Author: Decided to leave. Essentially, following guidance by the editorial team (they want us to almost always use slugs since it's less likely when titles change that something will break).

> In a collection, an element is an individual item in that
> collection. These types of elements are supported in
> a collection:

Reviewer: This is where the confusion of "element" that I mentioned particularly shows up.

The following h3 subsections are talking about elements in a collection literal, but this intro conflates items in actual collections and the elements in a literal. This mostly affects the usage of "individual item" as the collection elements can result in multiple items.

```suggestion
Collection elements are the syntactical constructs
used within collection literals to define the
resulting collection's initial contents.

These types of elements are supported in a collection:
```

Author: I have an alternative for us to take a look at tomorrow.

Author: Tentatively closing this because that section has changed so much. I'll have an addition revision today that we should look over when its complete. I'll let you know when it's ready.

*   Built-in data types

> *   Functions and methods

Reviewer: Perhaps for follow-up, we could also add a short subsection that introduces "Expression elements" that explicitly introduces the leaf elements.

in a nullable collection to another collection. If the
nullable collection itself is null, it is skipped and no
element is added for it.

A null-aware spread element has this syntax in a
collection:

```dart
...?<collection_expression>
```

In the following example, a list called `a` is ignored
because it's null, but the elements in a list called `b`
are added to a list called `items`. Notice that if a
collection itself is not null, but it contains elements that
are, those null elements are added to the result.

```dart
List<int>? a = null;
var b = [1, null, 3];
var items = [0, ...?a, ...?b, 4]; // [0, 1, null, 3, 4]
```

Because of null safety, you can't perform a
spread operation (`...`) on a value that might be null. The
following example produces a compile-time error because the 
`extraOptions` parameter is nullable and the
spread operator used on `extraOptions` is not null-aware.

<?code-excerpt "misc/test/language_tour/collections/null_spread_operator_in_collection_b.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart tag=fails-sa
List<String> buildCommandLine(
  String executable,
  List<String> options, [
  List<String>? extraOptions,
]) {
  return [
    executable,
    ...options,

>     ...extraOptions, // <-- OK now.

Author: Yup! Thanks for catching this. Should be fixed now.

because the null-aware spread operator is used on `extraOptions`.

<?code-excerpt "misc/test/language_tour/collections/null_spread_operator_in_collection_a.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart
List<String> buildCommandLine(
  String executable,
  List<String> options, [
  List<String>? extraOptions,
]) {
  return [
    executable,
    ...options,
    ...?extraOptions, // <-- OK now.
  ];
}

// Usage:
//   buildCommandLine('dart', ['run', 'my_script.dart'], null);
// Result:
//   [dart, run, my_script.dart]
```

To learn more about the null-aware spread operator, see
[Spread operator][].

[Spread operator]: /language/operators/#spread-operators

### If elements {: #if-element }

You can use an `if` element inside of a collection
to conditionally include elements in the collection. The
`if` element has a few syntax variations:

```dart
// If the bool expression is true, include the result.
if (<bool_expression>) <result>
```

```dart
// If the expression matches the pattern, include the result.
if (<expression> case <pattern>) <result>
```

```dart
// If the operation such as '(<bool_expression>)'
// or '(<expression> case <pattern>)' resolves as true,

> // include the first result, otherwise include the second
> // result.

Reviewer: Consider adjusting the break here to better collocate the "otherwise" clause.

```suggestion
// include the first result, otherwise,
// include the second result.
```

For more information about maps, refer to the Maps section of the
[`dart:core` documentation](/libraries/dart-core#maps).

[Using constructors]: /language/classes#using-constructors
[`Map`]: {{site.dart-api}}/dart-core/Map-class.html
[type inference]: /language/type-system#type-inference

> ## Supplementals

Reviewer: Then we could also add a basic section about the leaf elements (expression elements and map entry elements).

The following supplemental materials can be used with
Dart's collection types.

<a id="control-flow-operators"></a>
<a id="spread-operators"></a>
<a id="collection-operators"></a>

### Spread operation elements {: #spread-element }

The spread element (`...`) lets you add elements in one
collection to another. A null collection can't be used in a
spread element and will produce an error. 

A spread element has this syntax in a collection:

```dart

> ...<collection_name>

Reviewer: Sounds good, thanks for updating this!

Since a collection literal evaluates to some collection, I think it's accurate to consider a literal an expression as well :)

collection to another. A null collection can't be used in a
spread element and will produce an error. 

A spread element has this syntax in a collection:

<?code-excerpt "misc/test/language_tour/built_in_types_test.dart (list-spread)"?>
```dart
var list = [1, 2, 3];
var list2 = [0, ...list];
assert(list2.length == 4);
...<collection_name>
```

If the expression to the right of the spread operator might be null,
you can avoid exceptions by using a null-aware spread operator (`...?`):
In the following example, the elements in a list called `a`
are added to a list called `items`.

<?code-excerpt "misc/test/language_tour/built_in_types_test.dart (list-null-spread)"?>
<?code-excerpt "misc/lib/language_tour/misc/spread_operator_in_collection_a.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart
var list2 = [0, ...?list];
assert(list2.length == 1);
var a = [1, 2, null, 4];
var items = [0, ...a, 5]; // [0, 1, 2, null, 4, 5]
```

For more details and examples of using the spread operator, see the

> [spread operator proposal.][spread proposal]

Author: :D

```

<?code-excerpt "misc/lib/language_tour/misc/for_loop_in_collection_c.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart
var items = [1, for (var x = 2; x < 4; x++) x, 7]; // [1, 2, 3, 4, 7]
```

To learn more about the `for` loop, see
[`for` loops][].

[`for` loops]: /language/loops/#for-loops

### Nesting elements {: #nesting-elements }

You can nest `if` elements, `for` elements, and spread
elements within each other. This is a powerful alternative
to list comprehensions in other languages.

In the following example, only the even numbers in
`numbers` are included in `items`.

<?code-excerpt "misc/lib/language_tour/misc/nesting_in_collection_a.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart
var numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7];
var items = [
  0,
  for (var n in numbers)
    if (n.isEven) n,
  8,
]; // [0, 2, 4, 6, 8]
```

It's common and idiomatic to use a spread on a collection
literal immediately inside of an `if` or `for` element. For
example:

<?code-excerpt "misc/lib/language_tour/misc/nesting_in_collection_c.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart
var items = [
  if (condition) oneThing(),
  if (condition) ...[multiple(), things()],
]; // [oneThing, [multiple_a, multiple_b], things]
```

> You can nest all kinds of elements arbitrarily deep.

Reviewer: Is it worth clarifying besides the leaf elements (expressions and map entries)?

Author: Tentatively closing due to the age of the ask. Feel free to modify this section in a followup PR if you feel like it.

[`dart:core` documentation](/libraries/dart-core#maps).

[Using constructors]: /language/classes#using-constructors
[`Map`]: {{site.dart-api}}/dart-core/Map-class.html
[type inference]: /language/type-system#type-inference

## Collection elements {: #collection-elements }

A collection literal contains a series of elements. During
runtime, each element is evaluated, producing zero or more
values that are then inserted into the resulting collection.
These elements fall into two main categories: leaf elements
and control flow elements.

*   Leaf element: Inserts an individual item into a
    collection literal.
    
    *   Expression element: Evaluates a single
        general expression and inserts the resulting value
        into the collection.

    *   Map entry element: Evaluates a pair of key and value
        expressions and inserts the resulting entry into the
        collection. 

*   Control flow element: Conditionally or iteratively
    constructs collections directly within a
    collection literal.

    *   Spread element: Iterates over a given sequence
        (collection expression) and inserts all of the

>         resulting values into another collection.

Author: Fixed here & elsewhere.

    
    *   Null-aware spread element: Similar to the
        spread element, but allows the collection to be
        `null` and inserts nothing if it is.

    *   If element: Conditionally evaluates an inner element
        based on given a condition expression, and
        optionally evaluates another `else` element if the
        condition is false.

    *   For element: Iterates and repeatedly evaluates a
        given inner element, inserting zero or more
        resulting values.

To learn more about collection elements, see the following
sections.

<a id="control-flow-operators" aria-hidden="true"></a>
<a id="spread-operators" aria-hidden="true"></a>
<a id="collection-operators" aria-hidden="true"></a>

### Expression elements {: #expression-element }

> An expression element evaluates a single general expression

Author: Updated here and elsewhere.

and inserts the resulting value into a collection. This
general expression can encompass various constructs like
literals, variables, operators, function calls, and
constructor calls.

An expression element has this syntax in a collection:

```dart
<general_expression>

> ```

Author: I know this is very broad, but I left this here to be consistent with the other sections. I know it's very very simple, but I want to make sure people know that we didn't accidentally leave this out here.

### Map entry elements {: #map-entry-element }

A map entry element evaluates a pair of key and value
expressions and inserts the resulting entry into a
collection. Both the key and the value within this pair can
be general expressions.

A map entry element has this syntax in a collection:

```dart
<key_expression>: <value_expression>
```

### Spread elements {: #spread-element }

> The spread element (`...`) iterates over a given sequence

Author: Updated here and also for the null-aware spread element.

(collection expression) and inserts all of the resulting
values into another collection.

A spread element has this syntax in a collection:

```dart
...<collection_expression>
```

In the following example, the elements in a list called `a`
are added to a list called `items`.

<?code-excerpt "misc/test/language_tour/collections/spread_operator_in_collection_a.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart
var a = [1, 2, null, 4];
var items = [0, ...a, 5]; // [0, 1, 2, null, 4, 5]
```

If you would like the spread element to ignore a null

> collection that is passed into and not produce an

Author: Updated!

`extraOptions` parameter is nullable and the
spread operator used on `extraOptions` is not null-aware.

<?code-excerpt "misc/test/language_tour/collections/null_spread_operator_in_collection_b.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart tag=fails-sa
List<String> buildCommandLine(
  String executable,
  List<String> options, [
  List<String>? extraOptions,
]) {
  return [
    executable,
    ...options,
    ...extraOptions, // <-- Error
  ];
}

// Usage:
//   buildCommandLine('dart', ['run', 'my_script.dart'], null);
// Result:
//   Compile-time error
```

If you want to spread a nullable collection, use a
null-aware spread element. The following example is valid
because the null-aware spread operator is used on `extraOptions`.

<?code-excerpt "misc/test/language_tour/collections/null_spread_operator_in_collection_a.dart (code_sample)"?>
```dart
List<String> buildCommandLine(
  String executable,
  List<String> options, [
  List<String>? extraOptions,
]) {
  return [
    executable,
    ...options,
    ...?extraOptions, // <-- OK now.
  ];
}

// Usage:
//   buildCommandLine('dart', ['run', 'my_script.dart'], null);
// Result:
//   [dart, run, my_script.dart]

> ```

Author: ^_^

To learn more about the null-aware spread operator, see
[Spread operator][].

[Spread operator]: /language/operators/#spread-operators

### If elements {: #if-element }

An `if` element conditionally evaluates an inner element
based on given a condition expression, and optionally
evaluates another `else` element if the condition is false.

The `if` element has a few syntax variations:

```dart
// If the bool expression is true, include the result.
if (<bool_expression>) <result>
```

```dart
// If the expression matches the pattern, include the result.
if (<expression> case <pattern>) <result>

> ```

Author: I updated this section to be more clear. No need for context switching anymore.

```dart
// If the operation such as '(<bool_expression>)'
// or '(<expression> case <pattern>)' resolves as true,
// include the first result, otherwise,
// include the second result.
if (<if_operation>) <result> else <result>
```

```dart
// If the first operation such as '(<bool_expression>)'
// or '(<expression> case <pattern>)' resolves as true,
// include the first result, otherwise,
// perform the second operation.

> if (<if_operation>) <result> else if (<if_operation>)

Author: I'll delete this example. Essentially the previous one should cover this. I've swapped this out with `if (<expression> case <pattern>) <result> else <result>`.
